So hear the word of the Lord.
So all the generations from Abraham to David were 14 generations and from David to the deportation to Babylon 14 generations and from the deportation to Babylon to the Christ 14 generations.
Now the birth of Christ took place in this way when his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph before they came together.
She was found to be with child from the Holy Spirit.
And her husband Joseph, being a just man and unwilling to put her to shame, resolved to divorce her quietly.
But as he considered those things, behold an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream saying, Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary as your wife.
For that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
She will bear a son and you shall call his name Jesus.
for he will save his people from their sins.
And this took, all this took place to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet, but hold the virgin, so conceive and bear a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which means God with us.
When Joseph awoke from sleep, he did not, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, he took his wife, but knew her not until she had given birth to a son, and he called his name Jesus.
The grass weathers and the flowers fade, but the word of our God will stand forever.
Amen, you may be seated.
Pray with me.
Holy Father, we give you thanks for your word.
Your word which took on flesh, what an amazing, incomprehensible miracle this is as we stare
deeply at these mysteries.
But you give us, ah, you give us imagination to just glimmer, even just a hint of what this means.
And may you inspire and strengthen our hope.
But you do this by the power of your spirit, working in and through your word this morning.
Amen.
You know, the other day when I was driving to Costco, I noticed something that I've never really noticed before.
The giant billboard that's got like the lottery numbers and what you can win.
And the one that stood out to me is this is, listen, I'm not a gambler.
I'm not trying to promote this.
It's just an illustration, all right?
It was a power ball.
And the power ball number is like close to a billion dollars.
And I was like, oh, maybe I'd buy a ticket for a billion dollars.
And then I started going through my mind, thinking about what would I do?
I heard the voice of my father's like, well, you know, you only get like half of that.
And I was like, well, I could deal with half a billion.
It's 500 million.
Still a good amount to play with.
And so in my head, I went to this like, honestly, this was probably maybe six to 10 hours, but I wish I went through this.
I was working to, I'm sure I was, I wasn't like unproductive during this time.
In the back of my mind, I was just thinking, well, what would I do with that money?
And let me just tell you, I did some really cool stuff.
I basically bought Yakima.
This carpet got replaced.
You know, it's awesome.
It was a very fun, fun moment for me.
And there's a word for that, but you call that kind of thing wishful thinking, right?
It's when you're daydreaming about something awesome.
It's highly unlikely.
Listen, you know it probably won't happen, but you're okay with that, because you can just live there for a moment in your mind, and there's something amazing about that.
And then real life drags you back down and you got bills to pay and you don't have 500 million in your bank to pay for those bills anymore.
And it's like, oh, that's a bummer.
But you don't put your hope in it.
When you put your hope in something, you expect that thing to happen.
And so when that thing doesn't happen, you get disappointed.
Which for thinking, you're like, if it happened, that'd be great.
But I'm not going to get disappointed.
It was too disappointed.
If it doesn't happen, it doesn't ruin your life.
Because it can't carry the weight of your hope.
And I wonder though, if for a lot of us, the difference between hope and wishful thinking is not that far away from each other.
Where hope is maybe a step further where hope says, you know, it's just a high likelihood of this coming true.
Like it's just one tear over from wishful thinking.
It was like, this is probably not gonna happen.
Hope is like, well, it's high probability of happening.
You know, I would,
It wouldn't destroy me, but I'd be pretty sad if this didn't happen.
My question about that though, is that really what hope is?
Is hope just a high probable kind of prospect for us?
Is that how hope's presented to us in Scripture?
I kind of wonder if we kind of get our lines crossed with how we think of hope and the things that we put our hope in and really hope is this
is this thing where it's what I believe to be true about this world, what I believe that's gonna be true that's gonna happen, I live according to that thing.
And so it's a really, it's a framing of reality and how you live your life is based on what you hope, the things that you think are gonna happen in life.
And I think we get confused about what are those things that we ought to put our hope in and what are those things we ought not put our hope in.
And so what does,
Scripture promise us about hope.
What is the promised hope of Christmas and is it strong enough to handle real life?
And I think in Matthew 1, we get a profound picture of what our hope ought to be in, the deep hope.
I mean, it starts with this genealogy.
Matthew is written to this predominantly Jewish audience.
And you get this 4,000 years of genealogy, 4,000 years since the garden where they've been waiting
hoping for something to happen for this Messiah to come and crush the head of the serpent.
And then finally he just walks into the room and he's like, hey, here I am.
It's kind of this nonchalant transition, hoping the flesh, to all those years it's there.
It's a wild scene.
It's one of those scenes, I mean, like scenes like this and scenes like the resurrection, those ones that we read and think about a lot.
Oftentimes the wow factor kind of gets zapped out.
But just the weightiness here,
of 4,000 years, generation, generation, generation.
That's why I read back in verse 17, because it's like leaning into this generation.
All of a sudden, after 4,000 years, here it is.
He's born.
This scene, I think, has a lot to teach us about the nature of hope, that because our hope has come in the birth of Christ, our hope in Him is not vain.
And ultimately, it's that He alone is the one that can handle the weight of your hope.
So what does this teach us?
I think there's two things I'm going to focus on this morning.
The first is the substance of our hope, which is the stuff that our hope is meant to be made up of.
And the second is the birth of hope, which shows us why we can trust in the hope that's offered to us in the gospel, why it's a worthwhile hope, why it's one that can handle the weight of your hope, despite the challenges we have in life.
So first, the substance of hope.
the substance of hope.
In the beginning of this, this is the stuff that our hope is made up of.
This is not a series of maybe's.
This might come true kind of things.
This is even like a 99.9% probability kind of thing.
I mean, for any kind of hope to survive the reality of life, it has to be sure.
It has to be strong.
It has to be deep.
And hope is these expectations that we live by.
And the hope here is these promises that we can live by.
that we can build our life on.
These are solid foundations.
And there's three promises here that make up the substance of the hope that's offered to us.
The first is the promise of new creation.
The promise of new creation.
Look with me.
Verse 18 to 20 says, now the birth of Jesus Christ took place this way.
So this word birth is literally the word genesis.
So automatically our mind should be
imagining garden kind of imagery.
Back in the garden, there's a genesis of a new man, a second Adam.
And one of the things he's promised to do is not just crush the head of the serpent, but all the Old Testament prophecies.
He's establishing a new kingdom.
He's establishing a new creation.
This is what he's coming to do.
So this is the first kind of hint of this promise of new creation is this genesis moment of this new man.
And then you see it further cemented this idea of new creation here and the work of the Holy Spirit.
The work of the Holy Spirit is a clue to this.
You see here that Mary's patrol to Joseph, but before they came together, I think we know what that means.
She's found to be with child from the Holy Spirit.
What's happening here?
It's kind of a strange thing and a lot of strange, weird doctrines have come up trying to over explain the science behind this.
I don't think Scripture is trying to tell you the science behind this.
I think if you're going down that rabbit trail of the science behind this moment, you're missing the picture.
It's a mystery.
You can't explain this.
That is not what this is about.
What's happening is Joseph and Mary betrothed, which is a little stronger than engagement for us.
But it's not quite, they're married.
And so that's why breaking a betrothedment is like divorce.
It's almost like you're married in everything except for you don't share the marriage bed yet.
And so when Joseph finds that his, you know, betrothed lady is pregnant, he assumes the obvious, right?
Like it worked the same for them as it does for us in terms of how babies are made.
And so he assumes, hey, she's unfaithful, so I'm going to divorce her and move on, on my way.
And then this happens in verse 20.
But as he considered these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, St. Joseph's son of David.
Do not fear to take Mary as your wife.
For that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit."
Now, we could go on a tangent, and I did this a handful of years ago about the unusual angel activity.
I mean, for one, angels don't just show up and talk to people in Scripture.
I think because we're so familiar with the Advent story, we think that that's like a normal thing.
And angels are showing up and saying, hey, this is what you need to do today.
This is very rare.
that angels show up in Scripture.
And the succession of which angels show up in the birth story is just a signal that something strange is happening here.
It's this heaven on earth announcement.
It's pretty wild.
But this angel is saying, hey, Mary's been faithful.
It's not what's happening.
The spirit is at work.
What's happening?
The spirit is doing Genesis one and two kind of things again.
And Genesis one, the Holy Spirit hovered over virgin earth.
And here he hovers over the virgin womb.
And Genesis, the spirit is breathed life into Adam, and now the spirit animates the life of the second Adam.
And for the second time, you find a man that's born with not from the seed of man.
He's the second Adam, not born in sin.
And that's kind of the theological point that's being made here that is the spirit brings about the life in Mary's womb.
The hope of Jesus' birth is the hope of a new creation.
This is what Jesus coming into the world does.
He's coming to bird the world again and himself.
A new world where sin and all the incredibly painful moments of our lives are no more.
It's a new creation.
has been ushered in in this moment.
And that is the hope that's been promised to you.
So we might wonder, well, how does that help?
Well, this has actually started now that the decay, the sin, the broken relationships, the death, the funerals that you go to, they will not last.
This is why we can go to a funeral even right now.
Today, and we can mourn with hope because we know the grave is not our end.
A new creation is our end.
Life everlasting with Him.
is our end, and so this moment here, this hope, and this promise of new creation, what it does is it gives us an eternal perspective in life.
Hope in Christ anchors you in the world to come.
We can see past this world to the world that's gonna come, and it's sure.
This is the first kind of substance of the new hope is the promise of new creation.
The second promise here is
The end of sin.
She this in verse 21.
She will bear a son and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.
For this took place to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet.
All right, Jesus' name itself means the Lord is salvation.
Right, Christ means Messiah.
It's a savior.
Jesus has come to save us, to save the world,
from its sin.
The sin that's infest the ground as we sung about, the sin that's been infesting all creation and every relationship.
Everything that we touch is infested with sin everywhere.
He's come to fix this, to save the world from sin.
You know, like, just feeling good about yourself, your self-esteem, having good vibes and having promotions and money in life, having healthy marriages even, and children who love you.
Those things are good.
great things, but those things cannot save you from the tyranny of sin that exists in this world.
Listen, your ideal government and your ideal society, both good things, assuming your ideals are good, those things are good.
Those things cannot save you either.
And one commentator, Peter Leihart, says this about this, says, you know, political reform, technological advances, educational process by themselves cannot heal the human heart.
These are good things.
But these are often the things that we get stuck focusing on, but they actually cannot save you.
These are the things that are actually downstream from hope.
They're fruits of our hope, but they are not what we ought to put our hope in.
Those things, ebb and flow, they come and go.
You don't have to look far into history to see.
These things come and go.
Your resources come and go.
Your jobs come and go.
Our loved ones come and go.
We can't put our hope in them.
But we can't put our hope in the one sure thing here, which is that Jesus has come to save you from sin.
And this offer of forgiveness is unchanging.
You can't out-sin his grace for you.
He has come to set you free from this tyranny of sin, and he alone can do it.
This is the substance that our hope is in.
It's a sure thing, declaring to you that this in sin will not win in the end.
And he can carry the weight of your hope to be free from sin because he carried that weight with him on the cross and rose in victory.
So we get these first two promises that we can, our hope is made up of this promise of new creation, pointing us to this world beyond our world that is being birthed in this world now to this promise of the end of sin, which we experience now in our own lives.
And we look forward to this day when the sin will be removed from everything.
to the final promise, which kind of holds these two together, which is the promise of God with us.
We see this in verse 23, behold, the virgins shall conceive and bear a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel, which means God with us.
This promise of God's presence is probably one of the more wild claims of Christmas.
I mean, it's more wild than a virgin birth.
say is that the God who created all things can step into human flesh.
This is a mystery of mysteries that he is still fully God and fully man.
Why does he have to come and put on flesh?
Why does this matter so much for you and I?
Because in order to free his people, he needs to identify with them.
He needs to become the new Adam.
Adam the word itself means earth.
He needs to come and be of earth to redeem the people of earth.
The deepest pain that's caused by our sin is the separation that we have.
Not just in our relationship with God, but with
each other and with creation itself.
When we read through the curse in Genesis three, I mean, it touches every aspect, every relationship in life.
And the deep promise of the hope of God coming in the flesh is in entering our world is that He is healing all those things.
He's healing drawing near to us, healing our relationship.
So we can draw near to each other, healing our relationships with the earth that we can draw near to it.
To heal the separation that we have, Jesus is not just another prophet that's come.
The word made flesh with us, dry near to us.
This is a substance of your hope.
This is not wishful thinking.
This is not 99.9% gonna happen kind of thinking.
This is foundation.
And if you're gonna live off of a hope, it has to be foundational, has to be true.
Otherwise it's not gonna endure funerals.
It's not gonna endure lost jobs.
It's not gonna endure conflicts.
For hope to be real, it can't gloss over pain.
It has to be a realistic hope that knows that sin exists.
Doesn't ignore that, but knows that it doesn't win, that can face death and say yes, but there's new creation that can go through loneliness because why Christ is with you.
Like if the God of the universe who holds all things and sustains all things,
promises that he is with you.
That's a wonder to behold, isn't it?
Do you ever stop and think about that?
The God, he's a busy guy, right?
He's got to keep this world spinning and everything moving.
And yet he is near you right now.
He's not too busy for you.
That is the promise that's held out here.
That is the promise that we put our hopes in because they are true.
So where do you put your hope in?
What promises do you live by?
What promises lead you in your life?
Is it success?
Is it money?
Is it popularity?
Is it family?
These things will carry that weight for a moment.
But as soon as it lets you down, what's going to happen?
Listen, they can't handle the weight of your hope.
Because God's never promised you to be rich.
Never promised that you're going to have a family.
Never promised that you're going to have a conflict for your life.
These are not things he promised you.
These are good things.
Things we should seek after, but you never promised them to you.
They cannot hold your hope.
Christ alone can.
Put your hope in these things, and they will not let you down.
But maybe at least one question is this, how can we trust these promises?
Like how can we trust that these promises are true?
Well, because in Christ, our hope was born.
And this is where we find the birth
of our hope, the birth of our hope.
Look at me back here in verse 24.
When Joseph woke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him.
He took his wife, but knew her not until she had given birth to a son, and he called his name Jesus.
I mean, this is a wild scene here.
This message from the angel to Joseph is not about another thousand years of waiting.
It's not about something that's gonna happen again, way in the future.
It's about fulfillment.
Finally, after this genealogy in thousands of years of waiting, generation after generation waiting, you find Christ stepping into the pages of history.
I mean, what a moment.
This is.
Think about, think about these generations passing this hope on from father to son and then father to son and father to son and generation generation.
You got to think throughout there they're going to ebb and flow and whether or not they believe that this will happen.
They got to be asked in the question, when is it going to be?
Is this going to happen now?
And then there it is.
It's unbelievable.
I mean, imagine
of your own self and something maybe you've waited for for a long time.
Maybe it's your student and you're like, hey, I just want to get through school.
It feels like I'm going to be here for my whole life.
I get it.
I was there until five years ago or something or seven years ago.
It's going to come for you for a long time.
Just got to endure.
You just want to see the end of the school or maybe you're saving for a big trip and like I'm going to save 10 years, I'm going to go on this epic trip.
Or maybe it's like you're waiting to get married and have children
You're just waiting and waiting and waiting.
And if you've ever experienced those times, whether it's in something really long or maybe a little bit shorter, when you actually experience the end of waiting is joy, right?
You have this unbelievable like pinch me kind of moment.
The joy is palpable.
Now imagine you have something like that, but it's something that you actually
Pass on to your children because you didn't get the experience to end of it.
And then you pass that on to your children and that on to your children.
It's like this waiting times thousands, generational waiting.
Let's say your parents gave you this thing to look for and you are the one that finally gets to see it.
That's why.
Their hope is birthed.
So what does this mean that the hope is birthed here?
Well, it means that in Christ and the coming of Him,
that your hope is not merely a future maybe, but it is a present fulfillment of God's promises.
I mean, new creation, Paul says that you are a new creation in Christ Jesus right now.
That future promises yours actually right at this moment, free from sin.
Paul also tells us that there's no condemnation if you are in Christ.
This is yours right now.
In fact, one of the things I love about the New Testament is that the New Testament letters begin by calling the church, even the messed up ones.
What are they called?
They're called saints.
What does saint mean?
It means holy one.
This is true of you now, and if you have faith in Christ, you're no longer defined by sin or you're defined by saint.
What about the presence of Christ with us?
Is that really true for us?
I mean, Jesus did go back into heaven where he's, you know, we say he sits at the right hand of God the Father of mine.
He's not exactly right here.
But at Pentecost, what happens?
Christ's Spirit is poured out and fills his people.
We have the very spirit of Christ dwelling, living within us.
All these promises are find their yesterday men in Jesus.
If you have faith in him, they are true of you right now.
The coming of Christ means that you can taste your hope, you can experience those promises, and the fruits of them right now.
We're challenged with this.
is that it doesn't always feel like that.
We have bad days, we have bad decades, we still go to funerals, we still have conflict, we still struggle with sin.
And it can make us question whether or not this number of really new creations, I don't feel like a new creation always.
And this is where the season is very helpful, because it helps orient us around what time is it, which is an important question to know, is like, where am I at in history?
What time is it?
And this is what the theologians call that the now and not yet paradox, where Christ has come.
We experience these things fully in a real way right now.
His kingdom is come on earth and it is expanding, but it has not filled the whole earth yet.
Sin is still being put out.
Another way people put it is like you get the kingdom's been inaugurated in the coming of Christ.
I mean, it's been beginning to it.
to march into this world, the church is called, the present church is called, the church militant, meaning the church is on mission still in this world, because our mission is not over yet.
And we're working towards this consummated day when the kingdom is fully established.
We're living the time between those two times.
We're in the Old Testament, they live their life kind of waiting for the coming of Christ.
Now after the coming of Christ, we kind of live between his first coming and his second coming.
And so we live in the time between times where this kingdom is growing on this earth.
We experience it in real ways in our lives and our hearts, but it is not fully experienced everywhere.
In a lot of ways, we ourselves are in a betrothal phase with Christ.
What's more than just engaged is we are the bride of Christ, but we're waiting for that wedding feast at the end of days.
This is our time and we have to know what time it is so we know how to interpret
the confusing nature of life, the paradoxical nature of life between these two times.
This is what the birth of hope does in Christ.
It gives us a solid foundation for our hope that what he promised has happened and will happen.
And we can trust this future because we can taste these promises now.
So how does this impact our lives to have this kind of hope?
I think first,
much like knowing what time it is, it helps set expectations.
Because the reality is we all live out of our hopes.
Whatever the thing that you believe is the truest thing about this world and the thing that should happen in this world, these hopes you live out of.
Hopes set your expectations for life.
And if we have an expectation for our lives that God's kingdom is gonna expand on this earth, that he is birthing all things to a new creation, that there will be a day when sins no more.
I mean, Christ's presence
with us changes everything about our days.
It helps create in us an enduring people, a people who can learn how to wait and trust and hope, just like the Old Testament people did for 4,000 years of Navy.
We keep the hope, passing it to our children, prepares us for the long haul.
And I think in practice, the way this plays out in our day-to-day lives and Monday morning, when we wake up, is it looks actually pretty ordinary.
I often think about the shepherds who they come and visit Jesus, and they get to experience the angel, they come and visit Jesus, and it's super cool, and then what do they do?
They go back to shepherding, right?
It's like, okay, this is kind of an interesting moment.
What does this do for them?
I think what this tells us is that the Lord wants us to continue to do the things that we already do, but we do it with the new frame on, a new frame of reference, with a realized hope.
It changes us.
It puts a new lens over your glasses to help you see the world in a new way.
And we're sent out in the world as witnesses of this hope.
And this is one of the reasons why we gather.
We can and we can't, we re-imagine our hopes.
Remembering who we are, it's like each week is like, we're like the shepherds gathering around the manger, remembering Christ and then this place begins to transform us.
And we go out in the world as transforming people, bringing the transformation of the gospel wherever we go.
Everywhere in our daily lives, this moment, reorients how you live your life.
Reorients us to raise families in the faith.
Even when the culture around us is crumbling and people are like, why are you still having kids?
Don't you know the world is going to hell in the handbasket?
Why would you have children?
Well, because God's kingdom is forever and we believe in that kingdom.
So we're going to still have children.
We're going to still raise them in the faith.
It's to go out and have peace and joy in your workplace even when it isn't going well.
It's to give you an anchor in this world that's outside of the ebbs and flows of success.
It's to encourage you to go out, start businesses, start institutions that have different goals than just getting rich.
Hope strengthens the father and mother to see the deep purpose of raising children in the Lord.
Hope strengthens you when you have all sorts of desires, unmet desires in this world that you're unmet longings, to be at peace.
And when the Christ is with you, this hope is like putting on a new pair of glasses that learns how to see everything differently and teaches us to live in that way, to explore and be creative in how this hope is carried out in this world because our hope was born in Christ.
You can hope and have an audacious hope that cuts through the noise of this world.
Christ alone can handle the weight of your hope.
May we be a people who grow in this hope.
A mere hope be a loud testimony to world in need.
Pray with me.
Merciful God in heaven, we give you thanks for your goodness.
We give you thanks for these sure things that you hold out to anchor us when life is difficult.
May we hold on to you.
May we hold on to your nearness.
May you use us to draw many to you.
Do this work in us, we pray.
Amen.